Our theme Scripture is 2 Corinthians chapter 1, verses 3 and 4.
Praise be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of tender mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others
in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
From the time we were born, all of us have been in need of comfort.
You don't remember the first time you cried because you were hungry, uncomfortable or needing to be held,
but you probably do remember the last time you needed comfort,
and no doubt many of us are in need of comfort right now.
This is understandable.
Psalm 90 verse 10 poetically describes our life as imperfect humans by stating,
the span of our life is 70 years or 80 if one is especially strong,
but they are filled with trouble and sorrow.
They quickly pass by and away we fly.
Many different situations can cause us trouble and sorrow, disappointment or pain.
Some of them are what we might call common because every imperfect human has to deal with them,
getting sick, growing old and grieving the death of a loved one.
Other reasons for distress could be called circumstantial, accidents, economic problems,
the breakup of a marriage, natural disasters,
becoming a victim of abuse or other crimes, civil unrest and war.
In addition, we may need comfort related to our worship,
living in a divided household, experiencing persecution or imprisonment,
facing ridicule in school or at the workplace,
or perhaps a family member or a close friend leaves Jehovah.
Repentant wrongdoers also need comfort when they return to the congregation.
Whether the cause of our distress is common, circumstantial or because of our worship,
all of us are in need of comfort.
And the problem is worldwide.
First Peter 5.9 tells us that the same kind of sufferings are being experienced
by the entire association of your brothers in the world.
However, we can find comfort from the one who is revealed in verses 6 and 7,
where it directs, humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God,
so that he may exalt you in due time, while you throw all your anxiety on him,
because he cares for you.
Jehovah has always been the ultimate source of true comfort.
Moses was convinced that Jehovah would support and comfort him no matter what situation he faced.
With confidence, he wrote what we find at Deuteronomy 3327.
God is a refuge from ancient times. His everlasting arms are beneath you.
When we're down and struggling to get up, Jehovah will put his arms beneath us,
gently lift us up, and help us to get back on our feet.
The Psalms repeatedly express appreciation for Jehovah's tender care and comfort.
For example, the writer of Psalm 9419 voiced his gratitude to Jehovah by saying,
When anxieties overwhelmed me, you comforted and soothed me, as Romans 154 confirms.
All the things that were written beforehand were written for our instruction,
so that through our endurance and through the comfort from the scriptures, we might have hope.
No matter what's causing us distress, we can find scriptures that bring us comfort.
The book scriptures for Christian living includes the heading comfort,
which discusses many causes of discouragement.
Not only does it direct us to scriptures that confirm Jehovah's loving care,
but it also gives examples of Bible characters who suffered these hardships
and how Jehovah helped them.
One of the best ways to receive comfort from Jehovah is to ask him for it.
In the words of Psalm 145, King David praised Jehovah for the way he answers prayers.
Let's read verses 18 and 19.
David wrote, Jehovah is near to all those calling on him.
To all who call on him in truth, he satisfies the desire of those who fear him.
He hears their cry for help, and he rescues them.
Just as a loving parent patiently responds to his child's cheerful cries,
Jehovah turns his compassionate ear to our pleas for help.
As described in 1 Samuel 1 and 2, the Israelite woman Hannah was so distraught
and extremely bitter over not having any children that she couldn't eat.
When she approached Jehovah at the tabernacle, she began to pray and to weep uncontrollably.
Jehovah listened to and acted on this humble woman's prayer.
After that, Hannah went on her way and ate, and her face was no longer downcast.
Similarly, Jehovah will comfort us when we pour out our concerns in heartfelt prayer.
In view of all that the Bible has to say about comfort,
we're not surprised when we read the words of 2 Corinthians 1, 3, and 4.
Please open to this theme text for our discussion.
As we read it again, reflect on how these words can help us to comfort others
while we ourselves cope with the stressful conditions of these critical times.
2 Corinthians 1, 3 and 4 reads,
Praise to be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Father of tender mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others
in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from God.
The expression tender mercies comes from a word that's used to convey sorrow at the suffering of another.
It describes Jehovah's tender feelings for his faithful servants who are in distress.
Paul goes on to say that Jehovah is the God of all comfort,
so all comfort originates with Jehovah.
Verse 4 identifies a special way that Jehovah gives comfort,
and that's through our brothers and sisters.
Let's read it again.
It says that Jehovah comforts us in all our trials so that we may be able to comfort others
in any sort of trial with the comfort that we receive from Him.
Did you notice the connection between our receiving comfort
and becoming equipped to comfort others?
Jehovah comforts us, and as humans created in God's image,
we are moved by His Holy Spirit to share that comfort with others.
Therefore, Christians are not divided into two groups,
those who give comfort and those who receive it.
No, we all are obligated to give comfort,
even though we ourselves are in need of comfort.
How can we do this?
Consider the Apostle Paul.
During his first imprisonment in Rome,
Paul expressed appreciation for many brothers who became a source of great comfort to Him.
In Colossians 4, he mentioned some of them by name.
Aristarchus, Ticacus, and Mark.
We'll hear more about these three men in a later part of the broadcast.
Paul was grateful for the efforts his brothers made to visit him
and to comfort him by their words and practical assistance.
But for Paul, it wasn't all about receiving.
He used his time while in prison to build up those who came to see him
and to write letters of encouragement to the congregations.
A sister in South Africa by the name of Claudine imitated Paul's example
after she underwent major surgery.
Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, she couldn't receive visitors.
But Claudine was determined not to feel sorry for herself
and she asked God to give her the strength to comfort others.
Claudine contacted a woman who had studied the Bible in the past.
The woman resumed her study and attended meetings by video conference.
Next, Claudine started a study with the woman's younger sister,
who gave her the names of four other women who wanted to study.
By her determination to comfort others while coping with her own illness,
Claudine started studies with a total of 16 women.
At times, those who are distressed and in need of comfort may be reluctant to accept help.
For example, after Moses related God's promise to deliver his people
from Egyptian bondage, the Israelites at first did not listen to Moses
because of their discouragement.
Later, they did pay attention.
Naomi, whose name means my pleasantness, was living in a foreign land
because of a famine in Israel.
She was widowed and was grieving the death of her two sons.
When she was able to return to Israel, the woman of Bethlehem greeted her saying,
is this Naomi?
Feeling that Jehovah was responsible for her bitterness,
she replied with the sorrowful words,
to not call me Naomi, call me Mera for the Almighty has made life very bitter for me.
However, Naomi soon drew closer to God's people and accepted loving help.
Her bitterness was replaced with joy.
If you're suffering, try to resist the natural inclination to withdraw
and to avoid contact with others.
This will be a challenge.
But experience has shown that making the effort to be with others opens the door
to receive in the comfort Jehovah provides through the compassionate words
and actions of our brothers and sisters.
The comfort Jehovah provides when we endure tribulation can train us
to be more sensitive to the needs of others.
And that's the first step to giving comfort.
Being attentive and observant to identify those in need of comfort.
In many cases, the need is obvious.
Our brother met with an accident or has lost his job
or a close friend or a family member has died.
For some, the need may not be so obvious.
We may notice a change in behavior
or their facial expression may tell us that something is troubling them.
We don't want to pry, but we can kindly approach them and gently draw them out.
They may need time before they feel comfortable opening up about their feelings,
so we want to be patient.
The second step to giving comfort is pray to determine what we can do.
There may be little or nothing we can do to eliminate the cause of their distress.
For example, a long-time missionary who lost his wife said,
I don't want to get over it.
I just want to learn to cope.
The important thing for us to do is to apply the words of Proverbs 3.27.
Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it
if it is within your power to help.
We may feel awkward, not knowing what to say or do.
If so, reflect on the meaning of the Greek word often rendered comfort in the Bible.
It literally means a call into one side.
In other words, take the third step.
Make yourself available.
Don't feel that you have to give a speech.
Our brother or sister needs to know that someone cares
and our very presence can be comforting.
It could be that he just wants someone to talk to.
If so, be a good listener.
If you read scriptures together, emphasize that the words reflect how Jehovah feels about his suffering.
It's not so much what you say or do.
What counts is that you acknowledge his suffering and show heartfelt compassion.
For example, a sister serving at World Headquarters lost her mother and father during the pandemic.
After spending a long day of hospice with her mother,
she returned home to discover a huge fruit basket delivered by her fellow workers at Bethel.
She commented,
it wasn't the fruit itself which I had eaten many times before,
or the way it was so beautifully decorated.
But it was the thoughtfulness and love behind the gesture
that made my heart swell at one of the most difficult times in my life.
When a devastating earthquake in tsunami struck Eastern Japan in March 2011,
brothers in Japan and other countries responded immediately.
Two and a half years later, my wife and I made a personal visit to several congregations in that area.
Brothers in Nepal had sent messages of comfort to one congregation.
Brothers in another congregation showed us a board with many similar notes written in languages of the Philippines.
Brothers commented, we can't read the notes, but we know what they say.
What great comfort those short messages brought to our Japanese brothers.
While we were there, Super Typhoon Haiyan was ravaging the Philippine Islands.
Referring to the typhoon the Japanese brothers said,
now it's our turn to comfort our brothers in the Philippines.
As this world sinks ever deeper into these critical last days,
our need for comfort will only increase.
How grateful we are that Jehovah is the father of tender mercies and the God of all comfort.
He has generously given us the gift of prayer, abundant words of comfort in the Bible,
and a compassionate worldwide brotherhood.
As we benefit from these loving provisions, may we be alert to recognize others who need comfort.
Determine what practical help we can offer.
And take steps to comfort others while we cope during these critical times.